Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger and today we're
gonna introduce rotations into our framework for
basic geometry and we're gonna do so entirely
in the realm of the rational numbers which is
the proper and best domain for thinking about the
geometry so intuitively a rotation is something
that we're all very familiar with you get a piece
of paper and you rotate turn it around like this
what do you want to do is we want to peg that
down precisely in terms of the mathematical
concepts so here's an example of a rotation about
this point a we're working in the grid plane so
this is a rotation that moves the line m to the
line M Prime it fixes the point a this point B is
sent to B Prime this point C is head to C Prime
this point D sent to D Prime little circle like
this would be rotated around to another circle
like that so intuitively we have a very good
idea what it means how do we proceed formally
the usual framework says that we should start
by thinking about a function from the plane to
the plane the real plane to the real plane and
then there's some physical description in terms of
somehow describing what this turn of rotation does
often the angle is used to describe how much we
are rotating by there's plenty that's wrong with
this approach first of all we don't believe in
the real number plane because the real numbers
have not been established yet we don't believe
in infinite sets and the notion of angle is very
problematic as the ancient Greeks even Euclid
realized quite well it takes a lot of work
involving calculus to talk about angles correctly
and since we're interested in concepts which are
only completely correct we're not going to use
angle so to simplify the situation what we're
going to do is we're going to look not on what
rotations do two points but rather what they do
two vectors so for example the vector BC which
is the ordered pair BC here that little green
vector there when we rotate B to B Prime and C to
C Prime this vector here call it V is rotated to
this vector V Prime and if you take any other
vector which is a translate of V so still the
same vector V then it's also going to be rotated
to a vector parallel to V prime so rotations act
on vectors and it turns out to be much simpler if
we concentrate on rotations acting on vectors so
I have to remind you that vectors and points
although they're closely related they are
different objects and so what we're gonna have to
do now is turn our attention from the grid plane
involving points to the vector plane involving
vectors all right so let's have a look at this
vector plane it's a lot like the grid plane
but it's describing vectors not points so this
position here describes the vector emanating from
the origin to that position one zero corresponds
to this vector 0 1 corresponds to this vector
and what we're interested in is describing our
rotation so here's the unit circle things have
been expanded a little bit from usual so we can
see this a little bit better and we're assuming
we have a rotation that sends one zero to some
point a B on this circle so that's the rotation
that we're interested in then this vector is zero
one is going to be rotated to a vector which is
perpendicular to this one perpendicular to a be
minus B a those two vectors are perpendicular
so we've got a rotation that takes these two
vectors and sends them to those two vectors and
what does it do to a general vector say like
this one X Y well we use the linearity of the
rotation the fact that since this vector is 2
x this one plus this one 2 times this one plus
that one then when we rotate it we're going to
get two times this vector Plus this vector in
other words up here this is also the key for
understanding this rotation algebraically we've
assumed that one zero goes to some vector a B on
the unit circle zero one goes to minus B a which
is perpendicular to a V then a general vector XY
which is x times 1 0 plus y times 0 1 so it's a
combination of the two basis vectors that's going
to be sent to the corresponding combination of a B
and minus ba so it's going to be sent to X prime Y
prime which is x times a B plus y times minus ba
because this vector is sent to that one and this
one's sent to that much and we just work this out
coordinate wise the first coordinate is a times X
minus B times y and the second coordinate is B
times X plus a times y and this then gives us
a formula for what the rotation ought to do the
rotation should send XY to this vector and this
now is how we can define what a rotation is we
say that a rotation is just this symbol row with
an a B because it's determined by that vector
a B on the unit circle and it's a symbol or an
expression that has the following interaction
with a vector if you have a vector followed by
our symbol for our rotation then that combination
is by definition this new vector so we define the
rotation by how it acts on the expression of
vectors to yield another vector we had a new
mathematical object which we might call it a
vector rotation or the wrote for short and this
is how we're going to think about what a rotation
is now let's say a few words about how we combine
rotations and how we can think about a be on the
unit circle more precisely so let me remind you
that a bee is a point on the unit circle X square
plus y squared equals one then we've shown before
in our video on parameterizing the circle that a
bee is either the point minus one zero which is on
the x axis on the left hand side or it's given
by this particular beautiful formula involving
Pythagorean triples 1 minus T squared over 1
plus T squared 2t over 1 plus T squared for
any value of T for any rational number T this
defines a point on the circle and every point
on the circle is of this form unless it's this
one here so let's introduce a shorthand for this
let's say that this vector will write it now
as V sub T so our rotation by this vector a B
which we usually called a roll a be before we can
now write Rho sub V T okay it's the rotation that
sends one zero to this particular point on the
unit circle okay so now here's a very interesting
and important exercise that really says a lot
about the structure of rotations if you have a
vector X Y and you apply rotation by this vector
V T for some T and then to that you apply another
rotation vu so you take another point now with T
replaced by you then that combination one rotation
followed by another rotation can be written as XY
times a single rotation V W where this W depends
on T in you in this relatively simple form W
equals T Plus u divided by 1 minus the product
T times u now this is different from angles if
we were rotating with angles we would just be
adding we are not using angles because angles
are way too complicated but with this rational
formulation this formula replaces the the ordinary
addition of angles it's a very important formula
not nearly as well understood and used as it ought
to be so it's a very interesting exercise to do
that and then we can introduce this notation
that we'll just now say that Rho of VT times
Rho of vu this expression it can be replaced
by role of V W where this W is given like this
we're gonna say more about rotations this is
just sort of the first starting point but in
our next video we're going to now turn to
reflections if you understood what we've
done for rotations then understanding what
happens for reflections is not very difficult
it's much the same I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening